this is a video about my own
unconventional views on human rights I'm
someone who has a formal university
degree in political science and my
second university degree is in Asian
Studies but it's again very much about
politics
dealing with the politics of Asia
including what you could call human
rights issues in the history of China
Cambodia and elsewhere you can read many
am essays online in the past also I was
a student of First Nations languages at
First Nations University of Canada I
studied Korea [ __ ] etc and obviously
many political questions connected to
indigenous peoples in Canada are
expressed in terms of human rights
discourse so you could say I have a long
career both of studies and of actual
work humanitarian work and political
engagement linked to human rights and to
some extent the questions this the
questions of the future of the vegan
movement explored on this YouTube
channel also are linked to human rights
questions if only by way of providing a
contrast from time to time
this topic comes up now because I just
had some very intelligent email from ask
yourself ask yourself as the name he
uses he's another vegan youtuber and I
was really surprised and this is very
intelligent email it makes me kind of
change my opinion of the guy very often
in our interactions with other vegans
online
we're only judging them on the basis of
a couple people either way so when
people send me email i think is
unintelligent it makes me think they're
not very bright and when they send me
email that's intelligent i change my
opinion of them accordingly then I got
intelligent email from this guy ask
yourself and he does touch on this issue
of my repudiation of human rights my
saying kind of dismissive and negative
things about human rights discourse as
such am i offering a pretty harsh
critique of how some vegans just want to
extend the human rights discourse to
include animals they think that's the
simple way to define and address and
proceed with animal rights and vegan
discourse now you know I can't quite say
I'm an opponent of human rights but I
made the following laconic remark in my
reply to ask yourself I said look you
know human rights discourse is like a
baseball cap
human beings wear this cap so they can
tell which team they're on human rights
some countries really put on that
baseball cap and in international
politics and geopolitics and
negotiations they really claim strongly
to be representing human rights well you
know does Japan within Asia does India
these are gray areas these are questions
that come and go the change from year to
year a month a month you know the United
States and some countries in Western
Europe really wear that baseball cap and
represent that team how does Saudi
Arabia fit into that picture in Saudi
Arabia it's still actively debated
whether or not women should have the
right to drive a car
how does North Korea fit in that picture
so it's very clear in terms of real
world politics that as I say to some
extent human rights is just like a
baseball cap that human beings wear so
they can tell which team they're on
cynically or not and then I raise the
question does it really accomplish
anything if human beings take off this
baseball cap and put it on the head of a
dog if we try to extend this mentality
this human rights discourse so that it
in cue it includes animals or includes
some animals right we're putting the Hat
on a dog are we putting the Hat on a
cockroach are we putting it on a bear a
bear in the wild on untamed animals you
know so this is my kind of half joking
half serious way of indicating you know
my own cynicism own doubts both about
human rights discourse the utility of it
to start with and then how we can extend
to animals
there is one level on which I think
human rights is a completely non
problematic legal set of terms that we
can use rationally with no difficulty at
all
in England the last time I was in
England anyway I don't think this has
changed in England you have the right to
drink whiskey in a public park you have
the right to drink alcohol
and in Canada you do not now if that is
a human right or that is a civil right
now if you prefer to phrase it that
means that a poor homeless person with a
beard has the right to sit there and
drink whiskey out of a paper bag
in a public park and young wealthy
people can spread out a picnic blanket
and have a bottle of champagne either
this is a human right or it's not either
it applies to everyone equally or it
doesn't and of course if you live in
England for a while which I have it a
few times my life one time when I was in
England this came up on radio on you
know call-in radio and once I saw it
coming up in the letters to the editor
of a newspaper what you often find is
that this is the exact opposite of what
the public wants what the public wants
is to take away the right to drink
alcohol from homeless men with beards or
men who just might look like they're
homeless sitting in the park with their
bag of whiskey and nevertheless to
retain that right for live concerts
maybe there's a rock concert selling
beer or alcohol or for wealthy young
people who spread out a picnic blanket
and are well dressed and drink champagne
while they're in the park right so this
is one level on which human rights
discourse I think unfolds absolutely no
problem it's much easier for me to talk
about this and what my own position is
on human rights today than it was when I
was say 20 to 23 years old I can
remember struggling to articulate what
my position was and the reason is this
in politics there's a difference between
the problem itself the problem the
particular organization the problem with
particular concept and the problem of
public perception being perhaps very
poorly matched to the reality of what it
is we're discussing now I'm sorry a
somewhat awkward phrasing I don't know
any you know cute way to you know put a
bow on that but the distinction of
talking about here we can use the
Catholic Church as an example the
distinction here is between criticizing
the Catholic Church for what it's
actually done wrong perhaps crimes
against humanity perhaps human rights
violations for example in the Canadian
context I may complain about Catholic
Church and their role in genocide in the
destruction of native peoples cultures
languages etc I may complain about
specific doctrines the Catholic Church
teaches you know I don't actually
believe in prayer I think that when you
pray you're talking to yourself and
you're just pretending to talk to your
imaginary friend who created the
universe so you know there are various
ways in which I can
sighs the thing itself but a lot of our
time and energy in politics is not
invested in dealing with those problems
the problem thing is though there
instead dealing with the gap between
public perception of the problem and
what the problem really is you may be
living in a country or just in a social
context your own community your own
circle of friends you may be living in a
context where surrender of people who
really sincerely believe in Catholicism
who really sincerely believe in the
excuses that the Catholic made you think
that the Catholic Church makes for
itself whether in reference to what
Columbus did in 1492 the crimes of you
know genocide in colonialism in the past
or much more recent crimes from the
1950s to present within Canada you know
the Catholic Church has true believers
and you can be living in a situation
where what you're really wrestling with
is not the church not what the church
has done not Church policy not Church
doctrine not their actions or decisions
but you're struggling with the gap
between public protect public perception
of what the church ought to be what they
want the church to be and what it really
is in a very large part of what I said
felt so frustrated with when I was say
22 23 years old was that I was
surrounded by people who really wanted
to believe in the United Nations who
really wanted to believe in the concept
of war for peace who really wanted to
believe that human rights was a panacea
and I just posed a note the word panacea
is horribly overused in english-language
newspapers today but in this case it is
apt I feel I have to say it a lot of
people around me wanted to believe in
human rights as a panacea they wanted to
believe in human rights as something
that would solve all of the political
problems in Cambodia if only Cambodia
human rights human rights is something
that justified the United States
military intervention in say Yugoslavia
and yet at the same time it seemed to
justify the lack of any United States
intervention in theatres of war I mean
again like wearing the baseball cap
I saw human rights being used cynically
- you know justify atrocities that were
being committed by American allies you
know and of course to exaggerate or
vilify atrocities that may be better or
may be worse in some other country that
happens to be you know what
American opponents or a country where
the United States is willing to
criticize them or willing to even carry
out military intervention or other
punitive actions trade sanctions and and
what-have-you I like to do these videos
in one take with no script because it
has a sort of lively spontaneous quality
to it that otherwise might be lacking if
this were a dry academic discussion
weeding out paragraphs from an essay or
that sort of thing and you can tell this
video was a spontaneous response to a
conversation I had by email so it has
that lively feeling to it but it's
really interesting for me to watch that
first take of this video I just watched
it now and now I'm adding in this
addendum because I think I completely
failed to deliver the message of this
video and I fail to deliver it because I
was avoiding the B word I didn't want to
make this video into a statement upon
whether or not I believe in human rights
but actually the core issue here really
is about belief versus empiricism
or I could say belief versus nihilism I
came up in political science studying
politics let's just say being a person
who cares about politics even before I
was in university and after I had the
university education I came up in
politics surrounded by people who would
consciously or unconsciously think of
human rights as an ideal that justified
various actions aspirations
interventions decisions and politics
they wouldn't even think of it in terms
of outcomes they really did think of it
as a kind of quasi religious concept and
by contrast when I talk to these people
it was very very hard for me to
communicate with them because I'd asked
a question like well have you actually
studied what happened with the United
Nations intervention in Cambodia and the
haven't you no but there was this sense
like okay well the United Nations
intervene in Cambodia and created human
rights where there were no human rights
before
therefore it's it's a wonderful thing
and the empirical attitude is to start
off studying
Cambodia as a case study or studying
Yugoslavia as a case study or starting
studying any other intervention on
behalf of human rights any other action
on behalf of rights not with the
assumption that we already know what
human rights is and what it means or you
look at empirically what happened in
Cambodia step by step stage by stage you
look at the motivations of the different
actors involved and you look at the
outcomes intended and unintended
consequences and then you step back from
that picture once you've got a good
understanding of it maybe just one case
study like Cambodia maybe a half-dozen
case studies Cambodia East Timor
Yugoslavia take your pick all over the
world and then you step back and say
okay that's human rights that's the
reality of what this is okay the United
Nations taking over Cambodia writing its
laws for the United Nations providing an
interim dictatorship government in
Cambodia that this is the reality of
what we mean when we talk about human
rights the reality of the United Nations
setting up a series of short-term
governments in former Yugoslavia
so-called troika government and so on
and so forth one after another bizarre
history of the government of Iraq even
after the United States intervention in
Iraq this is what in practice human
rights means I've said before that I'm
not just a nihilist but identify with
the term historical nihilism I describe
myself as an historical nihilist and
part of that is I could say a
willingness to let history teach you
what things really mean you know what is
communism there's a real sense in which
you could never learn that by reading
karl marx's communist manifesto there
are some ways in which you can't I mean
it helps it's certainly part of the
study it's part of answering what is
communism you will find by reading
ideological works like Karl Marx's
Communist Manifesto but then look at
what actually happened when Lenin
had to run for government in elections
what happened when communists had
elections and what happened afterward
when Lenin hunted down and killed the
elected representatives in Parliament so
that he could take over and rule by a
dictatorship because he didn't get from
his perspective he didn't get enough
votes right what actually hunt happened
under Lenin and Stalin and Mao Zedong
not just on an executive level not just
on an economic level and maybe not just
on the level of the peasant experience
let's say on all those levels if you
just in a careful and concerned way let
history show you what communism means I
think communism becomes impossible to
believe in and as a general rule as a
nihilist I think that all things become
impossible to believe in
what's better than belief is living with
a certain kind of rigor doubt and
insight and an openness into still
learning that you're wrong
even when you think you've got a pretty
solid grip on the situation and what the
concepts mean so that is really the
contrast that I failed to get across and
that first take of this video is the
contrast between someone who has this
concept of human rights that they
believe in and they then apply it to
Cambodia or they apply it to Russia or
that apply to Yugoslavia whatever the
case may be or Iraq still ongoing and
someone who sits back and says ok wait
maybe I don't really know what you mean
by Human Rights maybe I don't really
know what the United States government
means by Human Rights what the State
Department or the office of the
president means by Human Rights I'm
gonna sit back I'm gonna look at this
case study and I'm gonna learn from the
reality of history I'm gonna learn what
human rights really meant in the history
of Yugoslavia Cambodia Russia China Iraq
what have you and then I'm gonna draw my
conclusions on this concept on the city
ology what its enforcement really
entails in terms of both intended and
unintended consequences there is a sense
in which you can say Lenin
never intended for people to starve to
death he wasn't a pro starvation
ideology but nevertheless when you
really understand communism as a concept
you know that putting into practice
leads to starvation that there is a
cause-and-effect relationship between
the economic reforms London made a few
decisions he made and the starvation of
huge numbers of people so when you grow
up in that context I mean I really think
that when I was a younger man I had a
kind of animus against the human rights
discourse because I'd seen it so misused
both cynically misused and misused in
this sense of true believers
exaggerating the virtues exaggerating
the concept of what human rights really
are rights discourse if we can keep it
sane and we can keep it down to earth if
we can keep it in the same kind of clear
limited legal framework with which we
discuss whether or not people have the
right to drink alcohol in a park whether
or not women have the right to drive a
car still a struggle in Saudi Arabia
it's possible on a date every time I
check the news in Saudi Arabia that
seems to be pretty close to the top of
the news headlines still debating
whether or not women should have the
right to drive a car and as you can
imagine people visit Saudi Arabia from
other Muslim majority countries that may
be very strictly Muslim but where women
have those rights you know so those are
questions within the rights discourse
that go on and where rights discourse
seems to me well enough suited to
address them however I also come from a
country Canada that you know kind of
waved the flag for human rights
basically since the end of World War two
and yet from my perspective some of the
worst atrocities for us as a nation that
were responsible for happened after
World War two they happened on our watch
we know during my parents lifetime this
is not ancient history they were carried
out against First Nations at the same
time that we were preaching human rights
to other countries and reproaching other
countries for the lack of human rights
so you know the holiness that discourse
the extent to which that discourse is a
failure and as I say just having grown
up around people who had expectations of
the United Nations the the concept of
peace
keeping itself of war for peace concepts
of human rights and international
governance and how this would change the
world and solve all our problems
fundamentally really panacea like
beliefs in human rights it's in that
context that have ended up having such a
nihilistic view of what human rights are
what they aren't basically what
questions they pose for us and how
rarely it is the human rights offers us
any answers